You're trying to keep up with
state-of-the-art AI research, but every
time you open a paper, it always gets
overwhelming with all these equations
and fancy symbols that can make it hard
to remember what matters. And while
you're stuck trying to understand the
details, other developers are using
state-of-the-art AI research to
implement more accurate LLMs and their
apps to sound smarter at work and stay
ahead of the curve. And in this video,
I'll give you the simple framework that
I used in my computer science degree to
be able to quickly read and understand
these dense technical AI research
papers. That way, you can follow the
latest breakthroughs in AI, use the best
models for your own projects, and stop
feeling behind every time a new LLM
drops. Hundreds of these AI research
papers get published every day. So your
goal should be to get the big picture as
quick as possible and then quickly
understand how you can apply it to your
own projects. There are five key parts
of any research paper that I look for in
order for me to distill its essence and
to understand the important parts within
a couple of minutes. The first part is
the title. The title includes the main
key words of the paper and it'll be very
clear when I show you the examples later
in this video. But there's also the
authors. And the authors are important
not to know what school they came from,
but specifically I look at what
department they research in. That way I
get an idea of the scholarly background
behind the authors of this paper. And
that gives me context into how they're
thinking about things as I read the rest
of the paper. Then after the title and
the authors, the third part I look for
in a research paper is the abstract. And
this is arguably the most important part
of the paper. A well-written abstract is
essentially a one paragraph summary of
the entire research paper and its goal
is to tell you the purpose of the
research as well as the methods that it
used in its experiments and the key
findings. That way you can treat the
abstract as your kind of north star so
that you never get lost in any of the
technical details later on in the paper.
You can always refer back to the
abstract to make sure you keep your
highle understanding of the paper. Then
after reading the abstract and deciding
whether or not I want to continue
reading the paper, I'll actually try to
scroll to the very end of the paper and
look for the conclusion. The conclusion
is similar to the abstract in that it's
essentially a one paragraph summary of
the main points of the paper, but it
also includes the author's
interpretation of the results and the
implications of the work. So that the
conclusion essentially tells you what's
important about the paper and what your
main takeaways should be. Then after I'm
done reading the conclusion and I got a
really good idea of what the paper is,
I'll then try and scroll back to the
front of the paper. But in doing so,
I'll look for any pictures such as
charts and as well as architecture
diagrams. For AI research specifically,
these two are the most important types
of pictures and that the experiment
charts show you model performance and
the system architecture actually shows
you how they built the model. And this
is because our brains process images
about 60,000 times faster than text. And
the media also, if they try to cover
this paper, they're going to be focusing
on these images. So, the authors of the
paper, if they think it's a really good
paper, they're going to try to put as
much effort they can as they can into
these diagrams to make sure they're
readable to anyone or the intended
audience as well as that they're
explainable and they describe the key
concepts of the paper. And that's pretty
much my framework. And these are the
five parts of a research paper that I
look for in order to decide whether or
not I want to read further into the
introduction or the experimental results
of the rest of the paper. Since a lot of
these papers do contain a lot of
equations and technical detail, you're
not going to remember all the details.
And that's perfectly okay as long as you
as an engineer or developer or computer
science student remember the main ideas
and the takeaways which you got from
reading the abstract and from reading
the conclusion. And after the abstract
and the conclusion, which are only
usually two paragraphs, I'm pretty much
able to get the essence of a research
paper within maybe a couple minutes of
me reading. That's even before I throw
it into chat GPT for further analysis.
So to recap, first I look at the title,
read any key words to get an idea of
what the paper's about. I look at some
of the authors and their background,
what labs they're from, and what
departments they research in, and what
fields they're from. Then I read the
abstract to find the purpose, methods,
and key findings. Scroll to the bottom
to find the conclusion to read the main
points, as well as the author's
interpretations of the results and the
implications of the paper. Then I scroll
back to the front of the paper. But in
doing so, I also look at different
pictures of the paper to reinforce the
key concepts. Now that you know my
framework for quickly reading and
understanding AI research papers, let's
actually apply it to three different
papers. And let me show you some
examples of how I go through each of the
five steps. First thing I noticed too,
you have to see that this paper is quite
long. Uh that's likely because it's more
of a psychology paper. So the 200 pages
is no joke. That's like the size of a
small book. So, you cannot approach
reading this paper like I did as a
freshman in cover to cover. You cannot
read this like a Stephen King novel.
You're not going to remember all the
details and you're just going to get
lost and it's going to take you forever.
So, let's go through the five main steps
of the framework that I showed you
earlier. So, your brain on chat GPT
accumulation of cognitive debt when
using AI system for essay writing task.
So immediately I want to know what the
writing task they were using because
whether it's like a creative essay or
maybe an essay based on historical facts
it could be different things. Second
step I look at the authors you know MIT
Media Lab MIT Wesley College MIT College
of Art and Design MIT Media. So to me it
seems like the researchers are very uh
skilled in graphic design. there likely
some psychology as well that is involved
with it. So we're going to see a lot of
really good graphics which is partly the
reason why I think a lot of media
covered this. So first figure the
dynamic transfer function EEG analysis
of band to show significance moderately
to high significance. Okay, this is a
cool picture of some of the neuroscience
here and some of the p values. Uh if you
don't know what p value means it
basically stands for statistically
significant. So the the the lower the p
value the more significant. But here the
scale is like in the opposite. So this
is the first figure I have. And now we
have the abstract. Step three. This is
quite a long abstract. Usually the
abstract is probably just like the size
of this paragraph or maybe like half the
size of this. So I'm not going to read
through all this, but I'll just quickly
skim it. LLM Chat GPT OpenAI humans and
businesses engage in LLMs on a daily
basis. It carries its own set of
advantages and limitations. Cognitive
cost of using an LLM in the educational
context of writing an essay. LLM group
search engine brain only group where
each participant used the tool to write
an essay. Conducted three sections asked
participants to use no tools and brain
only. We recruited 54 participants so
they have a decent sample size. We used
the EEG to record brain activity,
cognitive uh engagement. We performed
NLP, interviewed participants, named
entity recognition, search engine brain
groups had significantly different
neural connectivity patterns resulting
in divergent connective strategy. Brain
connective connectivity systematically
scaled down with the amount of external
support. That's a big finding they had.
uh search engine show immediate list of
the weakest coupling weaker neural. So
this is basically saying that like the
people who used the search engine and
the people who use the LLMs have weaker
brain connections
and here they talk about the specific
types. The educational impact begins the
general public in the study pressing
matter decrease in learning skills. The
use of an LLM has measurable impacts.
The benefits are apparent. We
demonstrated over the course of a
four-month study, the LLM groups
participants scored worse in neural
linguistic and scoring as a preliminary
guide for understanding impacts. Okay, I
guess what's cool is they show you the
summary of the results right here.
And yeah, here, see, it's even telling
you in this paper, skip to discussion
and the conclusion. What did I tell you?
Uh, if you're interested in the details,
we're not going to read them in this
video, but I'm going to just jump to the
conclusion and show you what I mean
here. So I stand it becomes crucial to
understand the full spectrum of
cognitive consequences in educational
informationational context. While these
tools offer unprecedented opportunities,
their potential impact is important.
Yep. LLMs are going to be important for
education. The LLM reduced friction
involved in answering questions. Sure,
it made it easier. However, it came at a
cognitive cost, diminishing their
inclination to evaluate the LLM's
opinions. So um when the people use LLMs
they're not as able they're less likely
to critically evaluate the outputs and
so concerning evolution of the echo
chamber algorithmically curated content
is the priorities of the LLM
shareholders as well as the accuracy of
the models only a few participants they
did not follow thinking regarding
ethical and the brain only group
reported higher satisfaction higher
connectivity so brain only group means
that they didn't use an LLM or a search
engine and so their more satisfaction
they higher brain connectivity as
measured through the EEG I guess caps
they used essays written with the help
of LLMs carried a sign lesser
significance of value they spent less
time on writing failed to provide a
quote from their essays human teachers
closed the loop we believe longitudinal
studies are needed okay and that kind of
gives me an idea of the paper saying
that chachi makes you dumber is
obviously a bit of a stretch from this
paper as I want to know also as I scroll
back what kinds of essays that they were
writing. Here are the essay actually
writing tasks. So uh many people believe
that loyalty to a nation means
unconditional support to these people
withdrawal of support is a betrayal but
doesn't true loyalty requires okay so
when they say essay questions I think
they're talking about very open-ended
questions.
Um, I guess they're not even measuring
the accuracy of the essays. They're just
talking about how well the person using
the AI tool remembers from it. And yeah,
I guess it makes sense. If you're using
an AI tool, it's you're not going to be
able to remember as much. But in a lot
of cases, do you even need to remember
as much though? But that's kind of a
separate discussion there. And again,
that's I could read through more of this
paper and it's very long, but that's
kind of how I would use the five-step
approach that I created to kind of get a
better understanding of this paper
rather than, you know, the hype you see
on Twitter or online. Now, for our
second example, we're going to go on to
a bit of a more technical paper that's
more LLM focused with the Deepseek R1
paper. I actually covered the main ideas
of this paper in a separate YouTube
video on my channel here called Deepseek
Explained to Your Grandma if you
actually want to understand some of the
math and some of the modeling behind
this. And we're not going to go that
deep into that in this video, but I just
wanted to show this in case it'd be
useful for you. So, let's read this.
Step one, read the title. Deepsek
incentivizing reason capability in LLMs
via reinforcement learning. So, the
reinforcement learning was a huge part
of this when it came out six months ago.
So reinforcement learning is going to
come up a lot in this paper as well as
reasoning and LLMs. Authors are just
deepseek AI. You know, I I could
probably find the one of the authors if
I really need to. Step two or step three
abstract. We introduce our first
generation reasoning models. Deepseek R1
zero and Deepseek R1. Zero is a model
trained on reinforcement learning
without fine-tuning as a preliminary
step. demonstrates remarkable reasoning
capabilities through reinforcement
learning. Deepseek R10 naturally emerges
with numerous powerful and intriguing
reasoning behaviors. However, encounters
challenges such as poor readability and
language mixing. To address these issues
and further enhance reasoning
performance, we introduced R1 which
incorporates multi-stage training and
cold start data achieves performance
comparable to OpenAI's 01 model to
support the research we open source. So
the main what I got from this is their
previous model DeepSseec R110 had a lot
of problems with poor readability and
language mixing and then they made
DeepSeek R1 which incorporates
multi-stage training and cold start data
before the reinforcement learning loop
to get better performances. And you see
here everyone was talking about this
largely because it was beating OpenAI's
01 model at least in most of these tasks
it was beating it. Here you can see a
nice little chart that I think describes
it. There we read the first three steps.
Step four, we're going to go on to the
conclusion and a nice conclusion will
typically be at the end right here. We
share a journey enhancing model
reasoning abilities through
reinforcement learning. Represents a
pure reinforcement learning approach
without relying on cold start data.
Achieving strong performance. Deepseek
is more powerful leveraging cold start
data along iterative fine-tuning. It
achieves performance comparable to
opening eyes 01 model. We further
explored distillation the reasoning
capability to dense models we use as the
teacher to generate samples and
fine-tune the smaller models. The
results promising. Quen outperforms
GPT40 and claude site on math benchmarks
with higher scores. Other dense models
also achieve impressive results
significantly outperforming the tune
models. In the future invests research
on general capability, language mixing,
pump engineering, and software
engineering tests. Okay. So the new
thing that the conclusion here brought I
want you to remember is it talks about
the distillation
which they don't talk about in the
abstract and the smaller dense models.
So they use distillation to basically
have the larger model be able to make
training examples to teach the smaller
model to outperform other models. That's
kind of the whole point of this. And as
I scroll up we're going to look for any
diagrams and charts. might look at
tables briefly. Don't care about the
equations. Here's a a figure I guess. So
asks a question, gives a response. This
is pretty typical in a lot of LLM
papers. We'll just show you the question
response pairs and you know how the
model answers them differently. You have
the reinforcement learning uh training
loops seeing that the I guess average
length increases as the number of steps
increases. Here it is. The accuracy
during training goes up as the number of
steps increases for the reinforcement
learning. This is very important because
this is the whole idea behind machine
learning. You have model accuracy going
up uh using reinforcement learning. You
have a template here which is the
prompt. It's using system prompts. Cool
to look at. You have the equation in
case you want to implement reinforcement
learning. Don't care about that right
now. You have distillation,
post training, and there is a few other
things as well and the introduction too.
And that was the deepseek paper within 3
to four minutes. And now I pretty much
understand what's going on with this
paper and why people are talking about
it. So I'm able to be more informed in
discussions at work and online. And I
can go read the rest of this paper in
depth if I want to. But I'm probably
just going to move on to the next
example. Now on to our third example.
We're going to read the original
Transformer paper back from 2017. It
looks like it was updated recently
because people probably started citing
it a lot. So, attention is all you need.
That's not the most descriptive title,
but if you're in the AI community, you
know what this paper introduces. Looking
at the authors, Google Brain. Google
Brain. This guy, I remember Google
bought this guy. Google paid this guy
$2.7 billion to go join back Google,
which is crazy amounts. If you think
about the OpenAI researchers being paid
$100 million to go to meta, this guy got
paid like $2 billion. So that was crazy.
So yeah, you have University of Toronto,
Google Brain, and this guy gmail.com.
Step three, we're going to read the
abstract. Okay, the dominant sequence
transduction models are based on a
complex or recurrent CNN's that included
encoder and a decoder. The best
performing models also connect the
encoder and decoder through attention
mechanism. Okay, you have a decoder
encoder. We propose a new simple network
architecture, the transformer. It's
anything but simple based solely on
attention mechanisms. So the idea of
attention mechanisms are going to come
up throughout the paper. uh dispensing
with recurrence and convolutions
entirely. Experiments on two machine
translation tasks show these models to
be better while being more paralyzable,
more accurate, I guess, and require less
time to train. It achieves this score
existing best results on this task. Our
model achieves state-of-the-art
while only using eight GPUs at a
fraction of the training costs after 3
and 1/2 days. We show the transformer
generalizes well to other tasks applying
it successfully to English const
constituency parsing both within large
and limited training data. This was a
mouthful and this was probably the most
technical abstract I've seen but this
paper is super important and the
foundation of the LLMs are all based on
this paper. Uh we're going to go to the
model architecture a little bit later.
So step four, we're going to go to the
conclusion.
In this work, we presented the
transformer, the first sequence
transduction model based entirely on
attention, replacing the recurrent
layers using commonly an encoder decoder
architecture with multi-headed self
attention. For translation task, the
transformer is trained significantly
faster on than what was used before. We
achieve state-of-the-art and outperforms
ensembles.
We are excited about the future of
attention models and plan apply them
other tasks. We plan to extend
transformers to investigate local
mechanisms such as images and audio
which nowadays LLMs can handle images,
audio and video. So that all came from
this paper. Making generation less
sequential is another goal of ours. And
we have the GitHub right here for the
codebase right here, just in case you
want to check it out. Okay. Now, as I
scroll back, we're going to start to see
very famous uh diagrams, specifically
this one. This is the multi head
attention. These are the the query key
value vectors that compose of this. I'm
not going to talk about them this video,
but if I wanted to research what multi
head attention is, I would do that. You
have the attention equation right here
which using dotproduct and a bunch of
cool math. Here is the transformer
diagram. This is the famous one you see
in every medium article. You have the
inputs outputs. You have the encoder on
the left and the decoder on the right.
And now that I get these pictures in my
mind now I have a better idea of what
this paper entails and I can read it if
I want to or just go on to another LLM
paper. So, that's how I break down these
complicated AI research papers in just a
couple minutes using my five-step
framework for reading the title, the
authors, the abstract, the conclusion,
and then back to reading the diagrams
and figures. It's not about reading the
entire paper from cover to cover. It's
more about understanding the high-level
essence so that you as a software
engineer or computer science student can
quickly apply it to your own work. And
this approach has helped me be able to
stay ahead of cutting edge AI research
and then also apply it to my own work
and stand out as a software engineer.
And ultimately, if you want to level up
your understanding of AI research and
build better AI based software, reading
some of these papers, especially the
popular ones, are going to give you a
lot of the background knowledge that'll
help you research these ideas a lot
better. so that when you're implementing
an API, you have a better understanding
of which models to choose in your LLM
apps. And if you want to see examples of
a lot of these LLMs being used in apps,
check out the rest of my channel where I
have other videos of me using these LLMs
in different web apps as well as other
projects. X